# Essential

## Why structs in C?

Suppose, you want to store information about a person: his/her name, citizenship number, and salary. You can create different variables name, citNo and salary to store this information.

What if you need to store information of more than one person? Now, you need to create different variables for each information per person: name1, citNo1, salary1, name2, citNo2, salary2,etc.

A better approach would be to have a collection of all related information under a single name `Person` structure and use it for every person.

### **Syntax of struct**

```c
struct structureName 
{
    dataType member1;
    dataType member2;
    ...
};
```

Here is an example:

```c
struct Person
{
    char name[50];
    int citNo;
    float salary;
};
```

Here, a derived type `struct Person` is defined. Now, you can create variables of this type.

## Create struct variables

When a struct type is declared, no storage or memory is allocated. To allocate memory of a given structure type and work with it, we need to create variables.

Here's how we create structure variables:

```c
struct Person
{
    char name[50];
    int citNo;
    float salary;
};

int main()
{
    struct Person person1, person2;
    return 0;
}
```

Another way of creating a struct variable is:

```c
struct Person
{
    char name[50];
    int citNo;
    float salary;
} person1, person2;
```

## **How to initialize structure members?**

Structure members **cannot be** initialized with declaration. For example the following C program fails in compilation.

```c
**struct** Point
{
	**int** x = 0;  // COMPILER ERROR:  cannot initialize members here
	**int** y = 0;  // COMPILER ERROR:  cannot initialize members here
};
```

The reason for above error is simple, when a datatype is declared, no memory is allocated for it. Memory is allocated only when variables are created.

Structure members **can be** initialized using curly braces ‘{}’. For example, following is a valid initialization.

```c
struct Point
{
	int x, y;
};
int main()
{
// A valid initialization. member x gets value 0 and y
// gets value 1. The order of declaration is followed.
struct Point p1 = {0, 1};
}
```

## Access members of a structure

Structure members are accessed using dot (.) operator.

```c
#include<stdio.h>
struct Point
{
	int x, y;
};
int main()
{
	struct Point p1 = {0, 1};
	// Accessing members of point p1
	p1.x = 20;
	printf ("x = %d, y = %d", p1.x, p1.y);
	return 0;
}
```

## **Keyword typedef**

We use the `typedef` keyword to create an alias name for data types. It is commonly used with structures to simplify the syntax of declaring variables.

**This code:**

```c
struct Distance{
    int feet;
    float inch;
};

int main() {
    struct Distance d1, d2;
}

```

**is equivalent to:**

```c
typedef struct Distance{
    int feet;
    float inch;
} distances;

int main() {
    distances d1, d2;
}

```